I am super thrilled to be introducing a
new performance from Valencia James
um first of all Valencia is a Barbadian
freelance performer maker and researcher
interested in the intersection between
Dance Theater technology and activism
Valencia's work explores remote
interdisciplinary collaboration with
creative technologists and how emerging
Technologies like machine learning and
computer vision might enhance creativity
in her contemporary dance practice and
vice versa This research has resulted in
a collaboratively built novel open
source software toolkit that pushed the
boundaries that pushes the boundaries of
live performance
2013 Valencia co-founded the AI Am
project which explores the application
of machine learning and artificial
intelligence to dance
she was a 2020 rapid response fellow at
IB where she co-founded the volumetric
performance toolbox a project that
responds to the global pandemic by
envisioning live online 3D dance
performance as a new way for artists to
connect to audiences from their living
spaces using minimal equipment
Valencia was invited by Golden Levin to
join the spring 2021 remote residency
for open source software art tools at
Carnegie Mellon University studio for
Creative inquiry she's presented her
work at Ted times danubia Ted times go
to Borg the international joint
conference on artificial intelligence in
Buenos Aires
isea 2015 and most recently siggraph
2021 where this performance first
um was first debuted the performance
takes place in Mozilla hubs I'll be
jumping off of your screen and joining
the participants in the hub but we will
be streaming the performance live to you
right now and with that just give us a
few moments as we get set up and we will
start streaming in just a second
Gene please take it away
greetings everyone welcome my name is
Sandrine Mallory and I'm pleased to
welcome you to Sugar a virtual
performance where we will embark on a
journey of remembrance and resilience to
honor our ancestors I will be your
experienced guide this afternoon I have
a humanoid Avatar
and this at this time please click on
this Avatar and then hold the space bar
while clicking on the plus button so you
can turn my volume all the way up so you
can hear what I'm speaking and the
louder the louder I will be for you and
the closer you'd be to me the louder I
will be for you sorry
please note that Mozilla hubs is an open
source streaming platform so the
performance may vary across devices and
internet bandwidth
so if you have any audio or visual
issues please simply refresh your
browsers and this should remedy the
problem
throughout the show we'll be changing
scenes when this happens your screen
will go dark at that time we invite you
to take a deep breath in and out as you
soften your gaze now I'll pass you on to
Valencia
hello everyone I'm Valencia James I am
just so thrilled uh to have you join us
today yes get closer to me if you need
if you're having trouble hearing me feel
free to get close I just wanted to share
a few words about what brought us here
today first of all I just want to thank
the
organizers of the gray area festival for
having us
um and this is a
a performance that is very dear to my
heart and that's because this time last
year we were all navigating the effects
of the global pandemic and then came the
brutal murder of George Floyd and that
set our communities in anguish
and at this time my coping mechanism
became seeking a closer relationship to
my ancestors and this was the starting
point of this piece that you're
witnessing here today
sugar and this is a story of
commemoration of the struggles and
injustices of our ancestors
and also of their resolution of our
resilience and Beauty because that's
what the pandemic really brought to
light for me
so this is a story of remembrance and
it's a tribute to their struggles
another thing that came about due to the
pandemic was the whole project that made
that makes this performance possible and
that's the volumetric performance
toolbox
and in July last year I started a
collaboration with the spatial
interaction lab glow box and creative
technologist store Bluey uh through the
i-beams rapid response fellowship and we
were responding to the closures of
theaters all around the globe and my
idea was how can we as well how can
performers get into the computer and
have performances in Virtual social
virtual space that defies you know the
the lockdowns that we were experiencing
how can we have liveness and feeling of
togetherness even though we're in our
own respective homes and that was the
birth of the volumetric performance
toolbox and this performance that you'll
experience today
and so what we've done has been
harnessing 3D video technology and
placing it in a low-cost lightweight kit
so that the farmers can create these
performances from their living areas
from The Living Spaces from their living
room I'm in my living room you're in
your living room yeah we are together in
this virtual space
and so during this experience we will
um we will explore you know the
injustices that our ancestors experience
but also uh I will give a dance tribute
and you will see me dancing live in a
lighter scan of the Annenberg Sugar Mill
and
um and this is something that that has
been very uh pressing for me and also
very special that I can imbue healing in
a space where so much Injustice happened
and so we're very grateful for our
supporters I-beam and the studio for
Creative inquiry at Carnegie Mellon
University
and also I'd like to especially
acknowledge and thank my collaborators
in creating this experience uh Thomas
Wester Simon Bose Holly Newlands Lauren
vaseli Sandrine Mallory and Terry Ayanna
Wright for their generous work in making
this happen as well as everyone who
supported this project in the past year
so thank you very much and I'm very much
looking forward to going on this journey
with you I'll pass it back to Sandrine
who will guide you along this experience
and I'll see you on the other side
thank you Valencia now before we embark
on our journey let me advise you that
some of the scenes may contain sensitive
content that may be triggering for some
individuals
just a warning remember also that the
scenes will change and when the screens
go dark take a deep breath in
and out as you soften your gaze
[Music]
I will always
Darkness
three months of darkness
shackles moaning and the smell the smell
of excrement
death
fear
we're terrified never to see home again
[Music]
everybody get in line let's go
everybody up stand up down
[Music]
flexible
seems like we've arrived it's time to go
up on Deck
come towards the center of the stairs
then using your W key move up forward
and up the stairs
this was the voyage that brought more
than 10 million Africans from the
continent to an unforgiving new world of
brutality and anguish
all in the name of Suga to fatten the
pockets of Europeans and Africans
participating in the slave trade
we've arrived on the Caribbean island of
Saint John
if you look around you can see a Sugar
Mill not too far from here
hold down your mouse or your trackpad
and scroll to look up down and all
around
but we can't stay here for too long
we've got to get on Shore to start the
long walk into the force of
commemoration
it'll take all afternoon so let's get
going
remember that I will guide you so stay
close to me to hear me when your screen
goes dark simply relax your gaze then
inhale and exhale deeply and we will
meet again in the forest of
commemoration
welcome to the forest of commemoration
please join me at the map of the island
for a brief introduction
the Danish claimed the island in 1718
and by 1728 there were over a hundred
Sugar Mill plantations on this island
right now we are in the woods
surrounding the Annenberg Plantation
it was established in 1722 with a
dungeon where rebellious slaves were
punished and a guard house to ensure no
slaves escaped
this was the way of the sugar plantation
system which had become the main
industry of the Caribbean
by 1750 it made up a fifth of All
European Imports
this high demand for sugar led to the
barbaric treatment of a stolen people
was one of these people
a royal taken from the aquamu village
and enslaved on a plantation at Coral
Bay on the eastern coast of this island
take a walk now through the forest to
learn what she and many others
experienced in the name of Suga
Breville like so many others could no
longer tolerate the intense forced labor
in 1733 she empowered over 150 slaves to
stand up for their rights rebel against
their masters and take over the island
breakfast Rebels took over a fort with
just knives then signaled with cannon
fire that it was time to kill their
masters
for nearly a year the aquamu people with
brefu as their leader maintained control
of most of Saint John
the Danes reclaimed the island with the
help of the French however
my apologies let us try that again
refu like so many others could no longer
tolerate the intense forced labor in
1733 she empowered over 150 slaves to
stand up for their rights rebel against
their masters and take over the island
brethu's Rebels took a fort with just
knives then signaled with cannon fire
that it was time to kill their masters
for nearly a year the aquamu people with
brethu as their leader maintained
control of most of Saint John
the Danes reclaimed the island with the
help of the French
however they never got barefoot
she and 23 other aquamo Rebels
ceremoniously committed suicide to avoid
being captured
the resistance the Rebellion
the spark she could she's created
continued on this island and all over
the Caribbean each Act of resistance
inspired more and more freedom fighters
Amelia in Guyana de salinaiti basa and
Barbados and many many more
we are who we are today because of them
look out now over your right over there
just past the edge of the forest do you
see the Sugar Mill in the distance
imagine breakfast at its entryway with
the rebels having fought for freedom
the Sugar Mill itself then becomes a
symbol of their Rebellion
we honor it through ritual we lift up
their names we memorialize our ancestors
struggles and the wealth it created in
all that is Suga
come let's walk out together now to the
edge of the force towards the Sugar Mill
and then please take a moment of silence
for those who came before us
[Music]
thank you
foreign
[Music]
my great-grandmother had to leave her
young daughter in the care of another to
cut Cain with her sons and verbis Guyana
my uncle was a manager at many factories
rules Hall and Guyana Appleton and
Jamaica
my mother and her cousins learned to
swim in the trenches of cane fields
healing care was part of the everyday
mischief
we got sugar and we blood sugar
[Music]
thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
foreign
our ancestors have ascended
can you see them
can you see them in the Stars
our ancestors have ascended
can you see yourselves in the Stars
we are them
[Music]
our ancestors have ascended
can you see them in the Stars
can you see yourselves in the Stars
we are them
standing into our plane
and they are us
reflecting in theirs
thank you so much everyone
[Music]
that is the end of our presentation
but we'll be continuing for a q a in the
CH in the link you've seen the chat in
video lounges this is the great areas
um video lounge
and we will continue with a live q a uh
with with our
creative team
and uh and gray area Festival curator
Wade wallerstein so please join us there
we're here with us uh to talk about the
experience that everyone just just
witnessed
um I'm here with Simon with with Simon
Marin Thomas Sandrine and Valencia uh
and I'm just so thrilled that was such a
moving experience from you know the the
the movement on the ship to replicate
the experience of of slaves passing the
Middle Passage to your dance performance
which was both somber and joyful
um and you know really captured so much
emotion and feeling thank you so much
um the Valencia do you want to introduce
yourself a little bit and perhaps
introduce your team to the audience
yes thank you so much Wade for having us
um I'm Valencia James I am a performer
and I work with technology and I'm very
interested in how emerging Technologies
can push creativity for dance
performance and how it can how we can
tell stories that don't usually get told
and I am very excited and happy and so
grateful to my my amazing collaborators
here we have a Thomas Wester of glowbox
who we started this project last year
figuring out how do we you know create
liveness in um in Social virtual
platforms and there's a marine vaseli
it's a amazing 3D artist and designer
sandring Mallory who's a
multi-disciplinary artist she was ex who
was guiding us through the experience
and Simon Bose who's the guy behind the
scenes who is make sure the stream were
works and also we we designed a
educational component of the project
volumetric performance toolbox where we
have invited artists to learn how to
create their own volumetric performances
and so and Holly Newlands I think is in
video lounges
who the technical artist who helped us
get all the the point clouds and
um together so it's it's been really
amazing thank you so much and so happy
that you all could join me
wow yeah no it was really it was a it
was a really uh beautiful and
coordinated uh performance you guys are
well oiled a well-oiled machine
um I you know you just mentioned the
volumetric performance toolbox and I
haven't talked about that too much
um uh as my under you know from my
understanding this is a an open this is
an open way that artists can use the
same technology that you used in order
to beam yourself into the Mozilla Hub
space that we just experienced can you
tell us a little bit about how the
performance Works technolog technically
um and how you were able to to produce
it
I I would like to pass that too
um Thomas but I will show my setup as
well so while Thomas you take it away
I'll just show you uh the kit that we
designed together sore Louis and Thomas
and the team at globox
yeah we were we were interested in uh
bringing people into a virtual space and
then also showing the performer
volumetrically so we created a a small
kit that uses a Raspberry Pi and an
Intel realsense camera to create this
point Cloud a live Point Cloud stream of
the performer and then we place that in
hubs Mozilla hubs which is using webgl
or web 3D technology to kind of render
that all together so it's using a pretty
standard video streaming technology what
we're doing is we're streaming both the
RGB and then also the depth map
basically together as a as a stacked
video and then we're using a Shader in
hubs to
um to unpack that back into a volumetric
so there's a lot of text speaker that's
how it works
it's so cool and you know from my
understanding it's an extremely
accessible technology in the sense that
it's low cost and relatively
um uh you know not everybody has
different abilities with with technology
I am but certainly have my own issues
but it's relatively straightforward to
to set up
um if you know an artist wants to you
know experiment with this toolbox how
can they get involved or how can might
they be able to to use this you know
Tech in their own in their own
performances or be able to access the
the toolbox so to speak
there there's uh the default answer is
all the code is up on GitHub but that
doesn't necessarily make it easy
um and I'm and we're familiar we're
aware with that uh we have um the codes
available there and then we have a
medium page
um that kind of walks through the work
that we did with the rapid response uh
residency so we have some documentation
but the best thing is to reach out to us
to help you help us guide you through
the process
um the the key thing is that that the
kit and what we were trying to do is
create something that didn't require a
laptop or very specific high-powered
machine which is hard to get to
sometimes and not everybody has access
to uh to create something that for under
300 you'd be able to put together and
have this stream and that's how we use
Mozilla hubs because it was an open
platform that we could customize easily
to allow for that
awesome that's that's so cool um and I
can't wait to dig into the code and see
see for myself what I can cook up with
that I was really inspired by this
um just to shift focus a little bit um I
want to talk to Sandrine about you know
the experience of narrating this project
and leading the the audience through
there are so many really emotional um
and violent and honestly uh you know
um painful uh subjects that you Broach
of course with the history of slavery
and the sugar trade
um how as a narrator do you approach
welcoming people into this space and
sharing this experience with different
kinds of people
um I imagine that to be a a big task for
anyone
it's it's something that we discussed a
lot in preparation and how to navigate
the different rooms because each energy
was a little bit different uh we wanted
to treat everything with care and make
sure that we're attentive to all the
emotions that are there so really I as a
narrator I really just tried to be a
soothing voice and just be calm and just
kind of a presence that you could anchor
to
in the midst of all the insanity that's
happening around you or the information
that might be hard to process you always
know that you can follow my voice and
you know I'll take you back
basically so I felt like it was as a
narrator as a guide it was to Anchor
energetically
absolutely and I think you did a
wonderful job of that you were the super
soothing and I you know I really enjoyed
taking those moments in the transitions
to take a breath and reset and you know
enter the next space with a clean
palette
um you know I'm I'm curious uh for you
know for sanjana Valencia you know
you're sharing this story with people of
all different races and identities
um and
um what has it been like for you and
what kind of feedback have you gotten
from sharing this experience with other
people who don't have the same uh who
don't have the same histories and the
same experiences as you do
um and what is that
and how does that experience of sharing
this kind of impact the way that you
feel about the performance overall
it's been largely very positive
um but we did like we were doing quite a
couple tests and inviting
um our colleagues and and you know
friends and family to to enter the space
as we were working out you know
different scenes and so one thing that
did
um the really good feedback was that we
need to let people know that this can be
triggering especially for people of
African descent like it's very it's a
very difficult thing to
to come into especially in an immersive
uh like you know looking at um web web
VR
um and so and so that's been trying to
do with care
um has been and also too to honor the
and to be authentic with it as as
possible you can't do you can't really
portray every little fine detail because
there's limitation to the platform but
how can we do it with care and
authenticity
um Sun Dream
It's also navigating a balance
um striking that emotional cord but at
the same time you know providing the
levity of the beautiful Point cloud
forest you know there's that contrast
that then gives you kind of like uh an
ease back into a different world so it's
it's
the point Cloud also I think just
visually it was different experiences so
that it felt softer after you've gone
through some of the trauma it becomes
softer so but I've not experienced
anything negative from people the
response has been positive and the
critiques that we got along the way we
incorporated them we worked with them
and and made sure that we were being
very careful
absolutely
um and you know and speaking of the the
aesthetic design of the point cloud of
forest
um Marie and I understand that you were
instrumental in in building this space
and I'd love to hear more about some of
your aesthetic inspiration and you know
how you put together this really you
know what you know for lack of a better
word sacred sacred space
foreign
yeah well um as far as uh the point
clouds go that is a holly uh um thing so
maybe I add in the chat or or sorry if
they can add in the chat or if they're
listening in
um but if so then maybe they'll expand
on that a little bit um so but I can say
because I do know a little bit about
what Holly did and we did work really
closely together so basically everything
that's Point cloud in the scenes
probably placed there and everything
that's not I I built in the scene so
um and then we we collaborated heavily
of course with Valencia who is Art
directing
um this piece so that's that's kind of
how the 3D art came to be but as far as
the um Point Cloud it's actually really
amazing and I mean Holly add to this if
you're if you're listening and you're in
the chat but it's made um from actual
space spatial data of
um the annaberg Sugar Mill so it's
actually uh Holly actually was able to
like turn that spatial data into Point
Cloud
um and yeah and then extract certain
parts of it like there's a forest that's
actually around the mill and when you're
in the forest scene that's a real moment
from from that space so I think that's
honestly one of the most amazing things
about this piece is the use of that
spatial data
um which I believe Valencia found in and
then
um Holly manipulated and so that was
just that yeah it's really cool
um and yeah I think we we definitely
talked a lot about went back and forth a
lot about how we kind of incorporate
this light Point Cloud spatial data with
kind of the heaviness of 3D objects and
especially a lot of low poly objects
because it is you know an online
platform and we're trying to keep speeds
quick um for internet and such so I
think you know it was a process for us
to figure out how those things can can
work together instead of kind of having
a contrast or how we can make that
contrast look nice so I think you know
we played around with that a lot like oh
do we want objects in the forest we want
this in the forest or do we want the is
like floating images like how do we
create a museum
um so yeah all those things and then I
would say
um yeah actually um Terry Terry Wright
also
um is another artist who helped along
the way and
um she also worked on the cosmos scene
um those illustrations were hers which
um are really beautiful as well and I I
like that scene a lot it's really
powerful to me because it's this space
where you kind of reflect on on the
whole performance so I think the
immersiveness
um that like Terry and I created in
there
um with with those illustrations and
then with uh sandrine's voice yeah so
it's interesting like I feel like you
know everything that we did visually and
spatially is so dependent on also on the
audio and you know also Valencia's
performance and so I feel like there's a
really powerful like yeah mesh going on
there
um we did have some really amazing
feedback about uh the boat scene
um the yeah the Middle Passage scene
which was a little it's actually
interesting because it's actually kind
of the opposite of the question you're
asking about like or how we were talking
about if it's like too much for people
or you know
um how it is it was actually just a boat
and we got some feedback that like wait
this isn't this isn't what was going on
like we we would say like sandrine's
vocals describe the conditions of the
slave ship but we got some feedback that
like we need to like make that more more
visceral and more real and I think um
Valencia and I worked on that
um up coming up to the festival so
that's a new addition to the piece and I
think
um yeah that that is also a really
powerful moment so yeah it was just it's
just such a sensory overload completely
resets you as you enter that first scene
and you hear the crack of the whip
um it sent a shiver down my spine
absolutely
um it's so so powerful
um on you know I don't want to take two
I don't want to take too much time or be
too long-winded about this but I do have
one more question for you Valencia
um you know
this story is something that has as you
say the the Sugar Tree has shaped so
much wealth in the world particularly in
the Western World
um and was so extractive and damaging in
so many different ways
um and I was wondering if you could talk
a little bit about the Contemporary and
modern day impact of the sugar trade
um and kind of how this performance
speaks to the current moment that we're
we're living in
thank you for that question Wade
um one of the one of the main like
drives to create this piece has been
that
um
I found like in my experience there is
not enough like knowledge like among my
peers and my colleagues especially even
in the theater world around the impacts
the real impacts of the transatlantic
slave trade and the sugar
trade on today's world and so it was it
was a point of a big frustration because
as a black person you just feel it and
you and you experience it every day and
there's a lot that of trauma that I was
holding even ancestral trauma that was
coming out because of my work and
realizing like oh my goodness it's not
only in my head it's it's real and the
fact that first of all so much wealth
like an unimaginable wealth was
generated in the Caribbean and also the
legislation and the whole Foundation of
policing black people was founded right
there with legislation
um
it has made such an impact and it stays
with us because a lot of legislation is
still the same that wealth is still in
the hands of of those people who you
know traded with slaves and it's not
just the people who own slaves it was a
huge banking
um establishment it was a huge system
and that wealth is still in the hand of
of those heirs
and you know even people who are like
the cousin of the queen
had property in Jamaica in Barbados I I
would encourage you to look at the work
of Hillary beckles and
um Queen Mother
um
she is a scholar from from I.T and also
talking they're talking about the legacy
of of this history is still very much
here and I mean think of police
brutality today and mass incarceration
it's just and when you look at the
history you see it's just a continuation
it's a Continuum and if we
can really grasp people from all walks
of life can grasp it's not just the
black history it's all of our history if
you can grasp that I think it can help
us to point us to what needs to change
and how to create a system of justice
and reparations it needs to happen
because it's not going to happen if we
keep the stand the status quo
so yeah I I think if we can understand
the history we can understand a bit
better how to shape the future
absolutely
um and it's it's such an important and
cogent reminder
um that was just so meaningful to to be
rooted in such a a sensory way
um I was you know going through the
performance today and just thinking
about wow I wish that I had seen this as
a kid in school when I was learning this
history and I was able to interact with
it and really you know at least in a
small way feel some of the emotions and
the feelings that
um you're attempting to evoke in the in
the audience
um so thank you so much for that and
thank you so much for this you know
really prescient reminder of what's
currently going on this wealth is still
there
um and these are the protocols these are
the systems of control around us
um this is exactly what we want to get
into with the festival
um and what we want to point out because
we can't change the protocol if we
aren't fully uh cognizant of what it is
we have to know it we have to feel it in
order to to make a change
um thank you all so so much thank you I
just want to add also out put out there
that this project is is also about
um artists really being able to create
their own worlds and so um Simon Bose
has done an amazing job with make
putting together a medium page and
documenting
um we have resources available for
anyone who wants to approach this type
of way of creating and telling your
stories and we drop it in the chat but I
don't have it here it's medium
medium volumetric performance toolbox so
Simon you can talk about that
that's awesome some quick background on
that is um last winter with support from
I-beam we
after doing our first pilot performance
we ran this as an educational program
where rather than you know work on that
first performance we did which is what
you just saw or a new version of it um
we worked with other artists to build
their own so
we developed these kits that cost under
100 it's a Raspberry Pi it's a real
sense camera
um we ship them out to people and then
we did a series of you know totally
remote workshops you know um
Thomas and Holly and I are in Portland
Oregon you know Valencia's in California
is hendrina California too A lot of the
artists were in New York
um and all across the country
um
but we you know came together through
Zoom through hubs and kind of figured
out how to build a Showcase of people
building their own worlds and their own
performances so on that Medium page
um we've posted quite a few most of our
um the recordings of our Zoom sessions
and the workshops we did so there's
technical
um walkthroughs you can learn exactly
how to use the kit
um all the materials needed for one are
available on there um there's still a
question of you know how you access
their servers but that's why we say
reach out to us and we'll help you get
set up but you can also learn about the
why of the project there's some
interviews with other artists who are
advisors so it goes beyond just the
technical and the how
wow what an amazing resource for people
and what a brilliant Mission
um I encourage all everyone in the
audience to go and check out those
resources and experiment with this
technology and to keep thinking about
these ideas watch the performance again
the recording will be up online and
really feel it and these stories and
these histories as we honor um as we
honor the uh the uh as we honor the
history of of the slave trade and of
black people in the Caribbean and
throughout the Western world
wow
um with with you know that was so rich
thank you so much to the whole team
um and I think that that is going to
draw a close on the live stream portion
of gray area Festival day one thanks
everyone who came out this was it was
really great to chat with some of you
guys in the in the chat
um now we'll be transitioning to our
video lounge uh please come in uh join
us we'll be there hanging out having
conversation and continuing uh to talk
about some of these really important
ideas
um with that uh this is Wade signing off
I will see everyone back here tomorrow
at 5 PM Pacific time thanks so much